---
layout: post
title: BRIDGE - Perioperative Bridging Anticoagulation in Patients with Atrial Fibrillation
article_author: James D. Douketis
article_year: 2015
author: Corbin Cox
tags: [Anticoagulation, Cardiology, Afib, Warfarin, Bridging]
---

# Summary

## Primary Question

In patients with afib without mechanical valves, is no bridging noninferior with respect to thromboembolism risk and superior with respect to bleeding risk when compared to perioperative bridging with dalteparin (LMWH)?

## Conclusion

In patients with Afib and a CHADS<sub>2</sub> &le; 3 (or maybe 4) without a mechanical, cancer, bridging before and after surgery appears to increase the risk of bleeding without modifying the risk of stroke.  

# PICO
## Population

Individuals with Afib, including valvular Afib, but not those with mechanical valves. Populations were skewed towards white males, with CHADS<sub>2</sub> Scores &le; 3-4. Cancer was not well represented in this trial. Nor were stroke / TIA Hx.

## Intervention / Comparison

D/C warfarin on Day (-5), Dalteparin or placebo on Day (-3), then restarting Dalteparin or placebo after the procedure until INR was therapeutic.

## Outcome(s)

**Primary:** Arterial thromboembolism (stroke, TIA, systemic embolism) at 37d post-op

​	Non-inferior, not superior

**Secondary:** Major bleeding, death, acute MI, DVT, PE, minor bleeding

​	No bridging was superior for Major Bleeding, minor bleeding was a superior exploratory endpoint, others not significantly different.

# Randomize Trial Checklist

## The study population included or focused on those in the relevant specialty? (i.e. the ER / ICU)

Relevant to surgical patients with afib without cancer or a mechanical valve

## Adequate Randomization?

Yes

## Randomization was concealed?

Yes

## Selection bias / consecutive enrollment?

No mention of convenience sampling etc

## Baseline demographics were similar?

Yes, slightly more cancer in non-bridging group

## Blinding?

Double blind

## Equal treatment except intervention?

Yes, but treating physicians were given discretion in determining whether pts were high or low bleeding risk and were permitted to choose time to restart bridging based upon this

## Complete f/u (&gt; 80% f/u in both groups)

Yes

## All pt important outcomes are considered?

Yes

## Adequate sample size and large enough Tx effect to be notices?

Rates of thromboembolic events were lower than initially expected, so pre-specified ranges for noninferiority were wider than likely appropriate.

# Comments / Problems

* Median time to thromboembolism after surgery was 19d, when pts should have been adequately anticoagulated on warfarin alone. Why?
* Most pts underwent a low bleeding risk procedure (89.4%), although having more high-risk pts would only bias towards non-bridging due to increased bleeding events
* Relatively few patients had a history of TIA/stroke
